It is no news that the process of drug discovery is lengthy and costly. Determining whether a molecule will be effective as a drug in the human body is one of the greatest challenges in this process. Action prediction of ADMET comes into play here. ADMET is a short form of Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, Excretion, and Toxicity. It is these five properties that define the behavior of a drug within our body. As an example, will the drug be absorbed into the blood? Will it target appropriate organs? Will the body be able to decompose and eliminate it safely? Is it toxic or harmful? By answering these questions at an early stage, the researchers will save time and money because they end up eliminating bad drug candidates before they go through the costly laboratory testing.

This project is approaching the problem in a different way, which involves the construction of a rule-based ADMET prediction system using basic data structures and algorithms. With straightforward guidelines such asthe  Lipinski Rule of Five, and an effective organization of molecular data with a Binary Search Tree, we can predict the possibility whether a molecule is a good potential drug or not. The dataset used consists of 20 commonly used drug molecules like Aspirin, Paracetamol, and Ibuprofen, or more complex drugs such as antibiotics (Amoxicillin, Azithromycin), antivirals (Remdesivir, Tenofovir), and cancer drugs (Doxorubicin, Imatinib). All molecules are modeled as objects that have six main physicochemical characteristics: molecular weight, hydrogen bond donors and acceptors, LogP (scaling of the ease with which a molecule dissolves in fat versus water), and polar surface area. It then uses algorithmic rules to consider these properties and results in an ADMET profile of each drug.

This project shows that important bioinformatics processing can be done based on basic computer science concepts such as data structure, searching, and conditional logic. It fills the divide between computational biology and basic programming and is an easier and simpler approach to make drugs easier to analyze.
